SemanticUI-less blocks widget (ObjectListWidget) + Improve and reorder documentation using diataxis. (#486)
kitconcept/volto-light-theme: docs/reference/widgets.md

# Widgets

> VLT provides a set of widgets that provide structural features.

Reviewer: A screenshot for each widget would communicate what it is much more effectively. Pictures worth 1000 words and all that.

Author: I will add them.

Author: Done.

## `themeColorSwatch`

Used for choosing a configured theme color (stored in `config.blocks.themes`).
Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ThemeColorSwatch` component.

## `color_picker` (Volto widget override)

> SemanticUI-less version of the Volto widget `color_picker`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Semantic UI-free version of the Volto widget `color_picker`.
```

Given an array of colors, allows you to choose one of them.
Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ColorSwatch` component.

## `colorPicker`

A color picker with an RGB visual color chooser, and a `hex` color field.
Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ColorPicker` component.

## `blocksObject`

The `blocksObject` widget is similar in functionality to Volto's `ObjectListWidget`, as configured in `config.widgets.widget.object_list`.
It allows to introduce a list of ordered objects with the same shape.
It allows to reorder them using drag and drop.
It uses `@plone/components`.
This widget saves its contents in Volto's standard blocks format, using the `blocks_layout` and `blocks` keys.

> This allows the standard serializers and deserializers to work with the object schema fields.

Reviewer: I still think this is a huge hack and we should figure out a way to support the resolveuid transforms in data structures that aren't blocks, instead of contorting the data to look like blocks. I'll take another look at this as I work on kitconcept.sitebuilder.

Author: @davisagli I do agree with you, you know that. We need an alternative, but until we don't have it, I continued with what I have at hand. If you can take a look at this too would be great!

The shape of the objects it contains is defined by either the `schema` or `schemaName` props.

If `schemaName` is provided, you should register a schema as a utility in the following form.

```ts
  config.registerUtility({
    name: 'footerLogos',
    type: 'schema',
    method: footerLogosSchema,
  });
```

`footerLogosSchema` is a schema generation function or a plain `JSONSchema` object that has the following signature.

```ts
export type BlocksObjectWidgetSchema =
  | (JSONSchema & { addMessage: string })
  | ((props: BlocksObjectWidgetProps) => JSONSchema & { addMessage: string });
```

Alternatively, you can provide the schema generation function or the plain `JSONSchema` using the `schema` prop and wrapping it around a custom widget.

> Internally it stores data using the `blocks`/`blocks_layout` keys, so it uses the standard blocks serializer machinery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internally it stores data using the `blocks` and `blocks_layout` keys, so it uses the standard blocks serializer machinery.
```

> Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlocksObject` component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlocksObject` component.
```

  /**
   * A callback function that is called when the value of the widget changes.
   * @param id The ID of the widget.
   * @param value The new value of the widget.
   */
  onChange: (id: string, value: any) => void;
  /**
   * The index of the currently active object.
   */
  activeObject: number;
  /**
   * A callback function that is called to set the active object.
   * @param index The index of the object to set as active.
   */
  setActiveObject: (index: number) => void;
  /**
   * The schema for the BlocksObjectWidget.
   */
  schema: BlocksObjectWidgetSchema;
  /**
   * The name of the schema.
   */
  schemaName: string;
  /**
   * An optional function to enhance the schema.
   * @param args An object containing the schema, form data, intl, navRoot, and contentType.
   */
  schemaEnhancer?: (args: {
    schema: JSONSchema & { addMessage: string };
    formData: BlockConfigBase;
    intl: IntlShape;
    navRoot: Content;
    contentType: string;
  }) => JSONSchema;
};
```

It's worth mentioning that the `activeObject` and `setActiveObject` props allow you to set and synchronize the active and uncollapsed object of the widget from the outside.

## Buttons component

> A widget where other widgets build up its functionality.

Reviewer: Do you mean that this is not a standalone widget but is used as a component by some of the other widgets?

Author: Amendede the docs about it.

 */
type ActionInfo = [React.ReactElement<any>, string];

export type ButtonsWidgetProps = {
  /**
   * Unique identifier for the widget.
   */
  id: string;

  /**
   * Callback function to handle changes.
   */
  onChange: Function;

  /**
   * List of actions available for the widget.
   */
  actions: Actions[];

  /**
   * Map containing additional the information (icon and i18n string) for each action.
   */
  actionsInfoMap: Record<string, ActionInfo>;

  /**
   * List of actions to be filtered out. In case that we don't want the default ones
   * we can filter them out.
   */
  filterActions: string[];

  /**
   * Current value of the widget.
   */
  value: string;

  /**
   * Default value of the widget.
   */
  default: string;

  /**
   * Indicates if the widget is disabled.
   */
  disabled: boolean;

  /**
   * Indicates if the widget is disabled (alternative flag for compatibility reasons).
   */
  isDisabled: boolean;
};
```
## `blockWidth`

A widget to select a width from the defined `config.blocks.widths`.
Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlockWidth` component.

## `blockAlignment`

> A widget to select the block alignment (`left`, `right`, `center`). Based on the {file}`/src/components/widgets/Buttons` component under the hood, so the actions and the styles to be applied are configurable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A widget to select the block alignment, one of either `left`, `right`, or `center`.
It's based on the {file}`/src/components/widgets/Buttons` component under the hood, so the actions and the styles to be applied are configurable.
```

> Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlockAlignment` component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlockAlignment` component.
```

## `size`

A widget to select the block size from a default list of values (`small`, `medium`, `large`). Based on the {file}`/src/components/widgets/Buttons` component under the hood, so the actions and the styles to be applied are configurable.
Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/Size` component.

## `DndSortableList`

> Not a widget, but an utility to build widgets upon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Not a widget, but a utility upon which to build widgets.
```

Reviewer: This is also in helpers.md, why is it here if it's not a widget?

Author: Upsss, I forgot to remove it.

Author: Removed.

> # Widgets

Reviewer 2: Needs meta stuff above

Reviewer 2: Done

VLT provides a set of widgets that provide structural features.

## `themeColorSwatch`

> Used for choosing a configured theme color (stored in `config.blocks.themes`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `themeColorSwatch` widget is used for choosing a configured theme color, which is stored in `config.blocks.themes`.
```

> Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ThemeColorSwatch` component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ThemeColorSwatch` component.
```

> ![themeColorSwatch](../_static/themeColorSwatch.png)

Reviewer 2: Let's use MyST markup for images, which will allow us to add other attributes or fancy styles in the future. See https://6.docs.plone.org/contributing/documentation/myst-reference.html#enhance-images

````suggestion
```{image} /_static/themeColorSwatch.png
:alt: themeColorSwatch
```
````

## `color_picker` (Volto widget override)

> Semantic UI-free version of the Volto widget `color_picker`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `color_picker` widget is a Semantic UI-free version that overrides the Volto `color_picker` widget.
```

> Given an user defined array of color definitions, it allows you to choose one of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given an array of color definitions, it displays colors that editors can choose.
```

> Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ColorSwatch` component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ColorSwatch` component.
```

> ![color_picker](../_static/color_picker.png)

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```{image} /_static/color_picker.png
:alt: color_picker
```
````

## `colorPicker`

> A color picker with an RGB visual color chooser, and a `hex` color field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `colorPicker` widget is a color picker with an RGB visual color chooser, and a `hex` color field.
```

> Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ColorPicker` component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/ColorPicker` component.
```

> ![colorPicker](../_static/colorPicker.png)

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```{image} /_static/colorPicker.png
:alt: colorPicker
```
````

## `blocksObject`

The `blocksObject` widget is similar in functionality to Volto's `ObjectListWidget`, as configured in `config.widgets.widget.object_list`.
It allows to introduce a list of ordered objects with the same shape.
It allows to reorder them using drag and drop.
It uses `@plone/components`.

> ![colorPicker](../_static/blocksObject.png)

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```{image} /_static/blocksObject.png
:alt: blocksObject
```
````

      style: Record<`--${string}`, string>;
    }
  | {
      name: string;
      label: string;
      style: undefined;
    };

/**
 * A tuple that has an icon in the first element and a i18n string in the second.
 */
type ActionInfo = [React.ReactElement<any>, string];

export type ButtonsWidgetProps = {
  /**
   * Unique identifier for the widget.
   */
  id: string;

  /**
   * Callback function to handle changes.
   */
  onChange: Function;

  /**
   * List of actions available for the widget.
   */
  actions: Actions[];

  /**
   * Map containing additional the information (icon and i18n string) for each action.
   */
  actionsInfoMap: Record<string, ActionInfo>;

  /**
   * List of actions to be filtered out. In case that we don't want the default ones
   * we can filter them out.
   */
  filterActions: string[];

  /**
   * Current value of the widget.
   */
  value: string;

  /**
   * Default value of the widget.
   */
  default: string;

  /**
   * Indicates if the widget is disabled.
   */
  disabled: boolean;

  /**
   * Indicates if the widget is disabled (alternative flag for compatibility reasons).
   */
  isDisabled: boolean;
};
```
## `blockWidth`

> A widget to select a width from the defined `config.blocks.widths`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`blockWidth` is a widget to select a width from the defined `config.blocks.widths`.
```

> Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlockWidth` component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlockWidth` component.
```

> ![blockWidth](../_static/blockWidth.png)

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```{image} /_static/blockWidth.png
:alt: blockWidth
```
````

## `blockAlignment`

> A widget to select the block alignment, one of either `left`, `right`, or `center`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`blockAlignment` is a widget to select the block alignment, one of either `left`, `right`, or `center`.
```

It's based on the {file}`/src/components/widgets/Buttons` component under the hood, so the actions and the styles to be applied are configurable.
It uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlockAlignment` component.

> ![blockWidth](../_static/blockAlignment.png)

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```{image} /_static/BlockAlignment.png
:alt: BlockAlignment
```
````

## `size`

> A widget to select the block size from a default list of values, one of either `small`, `medium`, or `large`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`size` is a widget to select the block size from a default list of values, one of either `small`, `medium`, or `large`.
```

It's based on the {file}`/src/components/widgets/Buttons` component under the hood, so the actions and the styles to be applied are configurable.
It uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/Size` component.

> ![size](../_static/size.png)

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```{image} /_static/size.png
:alt: size
```
````

## `blocksObject`

> A widget similar in functionality as Volto's `ObjectListWidget` (`config.widgets.widget.object_list`).

Reviewer 2: Is this what you meant?

```suggestion
The `blocksObject` widget is similar in functionality to Volto's `ObjectListWidget`, as configured in `config.widgets.widget.object_list`.
```

It allows to introduce a list of ordered objects with the same shape.
It allows to reorder them using drag and drop.

> It's using `@plone/components` and it's SemanticUI free.

Reviewer 2: I'd not mention Semantic UI. It's dead.

```suggestion
It uses `@plone/components`.
```

> This widget saves it's contents in the Volto's standard blocks format (`blocks_layout`, `blocks` keys).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This widget saves its contents in Volto's standard blocks format, using the `blocks_layout` and `blocks` keys.
```

> This allows to the standard serializers/deserializers to work in the object schema fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows the standard serializers and deserializers to work with the object schema fields.
```

> The shape of the objects it contains is defined by the `schema` or the `schemaName` props.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The shape of the objects it contains is defined by either the `schema` or `schemaName` props.
```

> If `schemaName` is provided, you should register a schema as a utility in this form:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `schemaName` is provided, you should register a schema as a utility in the following form.
```

```ts
  config.registerUtility({
    name: 'footerLogos',
    type: 'schema',
    method: footerLogosSchema,
  });
```

> being `footerLogosSchema` a schema generation function or a plain `JSONSchema` object that has this signature:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`footerLogosSchema` is a schema generation function or a plain `JSONSchema` object that has the following signature.
```

```ts
export type BlocksObjectWidgetSchema =
  | (JSONSchema & { addMessage: string })
  | ((props: BlocksObjectWidgetProps) => JSONSchema & { addMessage: string });
```

Alternatively, you can provide the schema generation function or the plain `JSONSchema` using the `schema` prop and wrapping it around a custom widget.

Internally it stores data using the `blocks`/`blocks_layout` keys, so it uses the standard blocks serializer machinery.
Uses the {file}`/src/components/widgets/BlocksObject` component.

> This is the shape of the types of the component:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following snippet shows the shape of the types of the component.
```

   */
  required?: boolean;
  /**
   * The value to use when the widget is missing a value.
   */
  missing_value?: unknown;
  /**
   * The CSS class name for the widget.
   */
  className?: string;
  /**
   * A callback function that is called when the value of the widget changes.
   * @param id The ID of the widget.
   * @param value The new value of the widget.
   */
  onChange: (id: string, value: any) => void;
  /**
   * The index of the currently active object.
   */
  activeObject: number;
  /**
   * A callback function that is called to set the active object.
   * @param index The index of the object to set as active.
   */
  setActiveObject: (index: number) => void;
  /**
   * The schema for the BlocksObjectWidget.
   */
  schema: BlocksObjectWidgetSchema;
  /**
   * The name of the schema.
   */
  schemaName: string;
  /**
   * An optional function to enhance the schema.
   * @param args An object containing the schema, form data, intl, navRoot, and contentType.
   */
  schemaEnhancer?: (args: {
    schema: JSONSchema & { addMessage: string };
    formData: BlockConfigBase;
    intl: IntlShape;
    navRoot: Content;
    contentType: string;
  }) => JSONSchema;
};
```

> It's worth to mention that the `activeObject` and `setActiveObject` props allow you to set and sincronize the active object (uncollapsed) of the widget from the outside.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's worth mentioning that the `activeObject` and `setActiveObject` props allow you to set and synchronize the active and uncollapsed object of the widget from the outside.
```
